Get on your bike: cycling can be a useful way to measure local variations in weather and also pollution, using portable and inexpensive weather monitors attached to handlebars.

The researcher John Cassano made rides near Boulder, Colorado, using a compact weather station attached to his bike. Cycling in winter for half a mile revealed local temperature changes of more than 10C (50F), a larger contrast over small distances that surprised Cassano, and a sign of how significant microclimates can be created by the landscape, such as small dips in the ground or nearby fields, woods and built-up areas.

Another survey by Jordi Mazón in Spain used a bike to measure air pollution from CO2. He took rides across Barcelona and the nearby city of Viladecans and found levels of CO2 shot up by about 90ppm over only a few hundred metres, largely from traffic, but dropped sharply near a forest, urban parks, and agricultural land – a sure sign of the part that trees and vegetation can play in reducing urban pollution.

Bikes used as weather stations have the advantage of being well ventilated, sampling over short times and distances, and highlighting very local effects such as built-up areas and nearby trees.

Researchers hope lots of cyclists using this equipment riding through urban areas can highlight all sorts of very localised weather and pollution, in the future hoping to divert bicycle users from heavily polluted areas or accident hotspots where poor weather increases the risks from traffic.

There can be no more hiding, and no more denying. Global heating is supercharging extreme weather at an astonishing speed, and it’s visible in Mexico and beyond. Guardian analysis recently revealed how human-caused climate breakdown is accelerating the toll of extreme weather across the planet. People across the world are losing their lives and livelihoods due to more deadly and more frequent heatwaves, floods, wildfires and droughts triggered by the climate crisis.

At the Guardian, we will not stop giving this life-altering issue the urgency and attention it demands. We have a huge global team of climate writers around the world and have recently appointed an extreme weather correspondent. 

Our editorial independence means we are free to write and publish journalism which prioritises the crisis. We can highlight the climate policy successes and failings of those who lead us in these challenging times. We have no shareholders and no billionaire owner, just the determination and passion to deliver high-impact global reporting, free from commercial or political influence.

And we provide all this for free, for everyone to read. We do this because we believe in information equality. Greater numbers of people can keep track of the global events shaping our world, understand their impact on people and communities, and become inspired to take meaningful action. Millions can benefit from open access to quality, truthful news, regardless of their ability to pay for it. 

Every contribution, however big or small, powers our journalism and sustains our future. Support the Guardian from as little as $1 – it only takes a minute. If you can, please consider supporting us with a regular amount each month. Thank you.